Using Image Volumes to improve extensibility of Strimzi operands (#155)
strimzi/proposals: 098-using-image-volumes-to-improve-extensibility-of-Strimzi-operands.md

# Using `ImageVolumes` to improve extensibility of Strimzi operands

Strimzi allows users to provide and use custom plugins in multiple different places.

> The most visible type of plugins are the Connector plugins in Apache Kafka Connect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most visible type of plugin is the Connector plugin in Apache Kafka Connect.
```

> But plugins are supported also in other parts of Strimzi.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But plugins are also supported in other parts of Strimzi.
```

When using custom Dockerfile, Strimzi upgrades can get pretty complicated as well, because the custom container image differs for each Strimzi version.
So the container image needs to be updated _at the right time_ during the upgrade process.

This proposal tries to improve the user experience by providing an additional method for adding plugins that will separate the lifecycle of the plugin and of the Strimzi container images.

## Proposal

From version 1.31, Kubernetes added support for _image volumes_.
Image volumes allow mounting a container image (OCI artifact) as a volume in Kubernetes Pods.
The image volumes are protected by the `ImageVolume` feature gate.
This feature requires also support from the container runtime used by the Kubernetes cluster (e.g. CRI-O or Containerd)
As of Kubernetes 1.33, this feature gate moved to beta.

The container image / OCI artifact can contain binaries such as the plugins for Strimzi or Apache Kafka.
And this proposal suggests how Strimzi can use the image volumes to let users provide their plugins.

### Building container images with plugins

> The container images with the plugin artifacts can be build using a `Dockerfile`.

Reviewer: This is a helpful capability. I was wondering if there's been any consideration or assessment of potential performance implications, especially in clusters with tighter resource constraints ,  when additional images are mounted as volumes, as it might affect pod scheduling and resource usage?

Author: I'm not aware of any impact on resources or scheduling from the KEP or Kubernetes documentation. Obviously, there will be another image to pull and store on the host etc. But at the end the data from the image would be either there or in the main custom container image. So not sure if it makes a real difference. There will likely also be some limit to how many volumes you can add. But I do not think that is necessarily a problem.

> As the container image is not executable one its own does not require any operating system features, it can start from `scratch` and just add the desired JARs with the plugin(s).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the container image is not executable on its own and does not require any operating system features, it can start from `scratch` and just add the desired JARs with the plugin(s).
```

```

Once this container image is pushed into the registry, it can be used as a source for the image volume.
The container image contains only the plugin (and its dependencies).
It does not contain any operating system artifacts or Strimzi JARs.
Its rebuild is therefore needed only when a new version of the plugin is released.

### Kafka Connect plugins (connectors, transformations, etc.)

Kafka Connect plugins continue to be handled in their own separate way even with image volumes through a new section in the `KafkaConnect` custom resource.
This is because they are the most commonly used type of Apache Kafka plugins and deserve the _improved_ user experience.
But it has its own technical reasons as well:
* The connector plugins are stored in a separately defined path defined by the `plugin.path` option in Apache Kafka.
  They are normally not included in the regular class path as most other plugins.
* Having a separate API allows us to mix the existing approaches (Kafka Connect Build or custom container image) with the connectors mounted from image volumes.
  This might be useful for example when some plugins are not (yet) available as container images.

> The plugins will be configured in the new section in `.spec.plugins`.

Reviewer: In the `.spec.plugins` section, users can specify plugin images using either tags or digests. Could we provide guidance on best practices for plugin versioning to ensure compatibility with specific Strimzi and Kafka versions? For instance, how should users manage plugin updates to align with Strimzi upgrades?

The structure of this section is identical to the existing `.spec.build.plugins` used to define the plugins that should be added through the Kafka Connect Build feature.
But the artifact types will be different.

The `.spec.plugins` section will contain a list of plugins.

> Each plugin will consist from one or more artifacts to allow compose the plugin from different libraries if needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each plugin will consist of one or more artifacts to allow composing the plugin from different libraries if needed.
```

As of this proposal, the only artifact type will be `image`.

> It will let users specify the reference to the container image with the plugin that will be mounted and used.

Reviewer: When multiple plugins are mounted into the same directory (e.g., `/opt/kafka/plugins/<pluginName>/`), is there a risk of classpath conflicts or JAR file overwrites? How does Strimzi handle such scenarios to prevent runtime issues?​

Author: Each plugin always consists from multiple artifacts. And each artifact is mounted into a subdirectory inside `/opt/kafka/plugins/<pluginName>/`. It is shown in the example YAML - the mount path will be for example `/opt/kafka/plugins/echo-sink-connector/9e1cec06`. So the files cannot overwrite each other.

As for creating conflicts in the classpath itself - for example by having there multiple versions of the same library etc., this is always possible and it is user's reponsibility to make sure it does not break anything. This is also how it works when adding plugin today without image volumes. I made it more clear in the proposal.

The image can be specified using a tag or using a digest.

> The advantage of the digest is that it exactly specified the container image that will be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The advantage of the digest is that it exactly specifies the container image that will be used.
```

The advantage of the tag is that you can always use the latest version of the plugin without updating the custom resource.

> But it will not be deterministic what is the exact version used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But it will not be deterministic which exact version is used.
```

### Other plugins

Mounting other plugins in other components is not as common as Kafka Connect connector plugins.
Most of the other plugins also need to be added to the regular class path of the application rather than to a special `plugin.path`.
Therefore mounting other plugins does not use a special API.
It uses the existing additional volumes instead and adds a new volume type named `image` to it to allow mounting image volumes.
This allows the users to mount the container image into an directory inside the `/mnt` path.

Afterwards, they can use an environment variable to add the JARs from the mounted container image to the class path.
For Kafka-based operands and Cruise Control the environment variable to use is `CLASSPATH`.
For Strimzi operands (User and Topic operators), the environment variable to use is `JAVA_CLASSPATH`.

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  # ...
spec:
  kafka:
    # ...
    template:
      kafkaContainer:
        volumeMounts:
          - name: my-authorizer

>             mountPath: /mnt/my-authorizer/

Reviewer 2: Should the proposal document a recommended mount point that users should use?  I suggest this to avoid conflicts between user configuration and future Strimzi enhancement (that might use mount points of their own).

Author: The _additional volumes_ (an existing functionality to which I just add a new volume type) allow mounting only into the `/mnt` path. So that should take care of it. I tried to make it clear in the proposal.

Instead, tiered storage has its own class path configuration in `.spec.tieredStorage.remoteStorageManager.classPath`.
This field should be used instead of the `CLASSPATH` environment variable.
For example:

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  # ...
spec:
  kafka:
    # ...
    template:
      kafkaContainer:
        volumeMounts:
          - name: my-tiered-storage-plugin
            mountPath: /mnt/my-tiered-storage-plugin/
      pod:
        volumes:
          - name: my-tiered-storage-plugin
            image:
              reference: ghcr.io/scholzj/my-tiered-storage-plugin:latest
              pullPolicy: IfNotPresent
    tieredStorage:
      type: custom
      remoteStorageManager:
        # ...
        classPath: /mnt/my-tiered-storage-plugin/*
        config:
          # ...
```

### Immutability

When using image volumes to provide Apache Kafka plugins, we do not rely anymore that all the software is provided from a single immutable container image provided by Strimzi and later modified by the user to add the custom plugin.
Instead we compose the running software from multiple images:
* The Strimzi image with the Strimzi software

> * One or more plugin images mounted as volumes

Reviewer: Mounting external images as volumes introduces potential security considerations. How does Strimzi ensure that these plugin images are from trusted sources, and are there recommendations for users to verify the integrity and authenticity of these images?

Author: I added a chapter on this. But essentially, it does not differ from the regular container image used today. It is user's responsibility to use _trusted sources_, make sure their container registry is secure etc. Kubernetes will do the usual checks when pulling the image such as integrity checks. So I do not think there is any real change compared to today.

For example, following the example Kafka Connect deployment with the configuration used in the corresponding section above:

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaConnect
metadata:
  # ...
spec:
  # ...
  plugins:
    - name: echo-sink-connector
      artifacts:
        - type: image
          reference: ghcr.io/scholzj/echo-sink@sha256:7078b3ccbc0d6e76fefb832dd6e4bb6b704f83611428c9d5b060ab0b6c3e8712
          pullPolicy: Always
```

The software in this case will be defined as the following set of container images:
* `quay.io/scholzj/kafka@sha256:fd0a060b512240c6dc45e90de26fd738fbbcd470dbb1a3c4c8ec808392db6159` as the _Strimzi_ container image from my prototype build
* `ghcr.io/scholzj/echo-sink@sha256:7078b3ccbc0d6e76fefb832dd6e4bb6b704f83611428c9d5b060ab0b6c3e8712` as the Kafka Connect connector image

Each of these are immutable container images and clearly define the software being run in a given operand.

### Error handling

> Strimzi cannot easily detect if the `ImageVolume` feature gate is enabled and if image volumes are supported in given Kubernetes cluster.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Strimzi cannot easily detect if the `ImageVolume` feature gate is enabled and if image volumes are supported in a given Kubernetes cluster.
```

> While we will use the documentation to warn users that this feature can be used only in Kubernetes cluster where it is supported, it might always happen that users try to use it even when not supported by Kubernetes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While we will use the documentation to warn users that this feature can be used only in Kubernetes cluster where it is supported, it might happen that users try to use it even when not supported by Kubernetes.
```

In that case, Kubernetes will ignore the image volume and its volume mount and create the Pod without it (tested with Minikube on Kubernetes 1.31 and 1.32, and with OpenShift 4.18).
As a result, the plugin will be missing and the user has to choose another way how to add it.

In case the image volumes are enabled in Kubernetes but not supported by the container runtime, the container will end up in the `CreateContainerError` state with the following message:

```yaml
  status:
    state:
      waiting:
        message: 'Error response from daemon: invalid volume specification: '':/mnt/echo-sink-plugin/:ro'''
        reason: CreateContainerError
```

In such case, the user will need to edit the related Strimzi custom resource, remove the parts using the image volumes and apply the changes.
Afterwards, the Strimzi operator will recover and recreate the Pod with a valid configuration.

> Use of a feature gate to prevent the use of image volumes on unsupported cluster was considered.

Reviewer: In envs where the ImageVolume feature gate is not enabled or supported, the it's mentioned that K8s will ignore the image volume and create the Pod without it. Is there a mechanism to alert users or operators proactively about such misconfigurations to prevent silent failures?

Author: Unfortunately, not as far as I know, we cannot detect it easily. TBH, I find it pretty dumb that Kubernetes does not just return an error. But it is what it is. We could in theory _query the Pod once created and check if the volume is there_. But as there are many injected volumes etc., I think we should try to avoid it as it is not worth the complexity.

I think it will work fine and users will notice it sooner or later. What might be annoying is that they might be coming to Slack to ask us why ...

But since it is expected that we will be seeing Kubernetes clusters which do not support image volumes for a very long time, the feature gate which would be for a long time in alpha phase and would need to be always enabled does not seem to make sense.

### Testing strategy

The functionality from this proposal will be initially tested only using unit tests.
This should be sufficient in terms of test coverage given we only create the right Pod definition and the rest is up to Kubernetes.
Introducing a system test right now would mean that such a test would be executable only on very specific Kubernetes versions with specific configurations and would not add much value.
System tests using image volumes might be added at a later stage once the image volume support reaches more Kubernetes clusters.

## Out of scope

The image volumes have the potential to simplify how we add our own plugins to our Apache Kafka container images and how we structure them.

> We might for example have just a simple Strimzi base image and have the operator mount the different components into it as image volumes on demand:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, we could have a simple Strimzi base image, with the operator mounting additional components as image volumes on demand, such as:
```

* The supported Kafka versions
* 3rd party libraries (i.e. plugins shipped by Strimzi out of the box)
* Cruise Control and Kafka Exporter

This would make it easier to handle base image CVEs but also CVEs in the different components.
It would also make sure that software that might contain CVEs will not be actually in the container image unless it s actually needed / used.

However, to be able to propose and implement something like this, we first need all Kubernetes clusters supported by Strimzi to also enable and support the ImageVolume feature gate.
And it might take several years until we get there.

> Until then, the image volumes can be used only for the _optional_ Strimzi features that have some other alternatives.

Reviewer 3: shall we list the optional components that we propose to include for now? Maybe this information should be more prominent than out of scope? An In Scope section?

Author: I tried to reword it a bit. What I was trying to say here is that the features added by this proposal are only optional for the user. So for them we do not mind if the image volumes are supported only somewhere. But the other possibilities mentioned in the `Out of scope` section would be required and if we implemented them, Strimzi would not work at all in environments without the image volume support. So that is why we cannot consider these out of scope features right now.

* Having a separate API allows us to mix the existing approaches (Kafka Connect Build or custom container image) with the connectors mounted from image volumes.
  This might be useful for example when some plugins are not (yet) available as container images.

The plugins will be configured in the new section in `.spec.plugins`.
The structure of this section is identical to the existing `.spec.build.plugins` used to define the plugins that should be added through the Kafka Connect Build feature.
But the artifact types will be different.

The `.spec.plugins` section will contain a list of plugins.
Each plugin will consist of one or more artifacts to allow compose the plugin from different libraries if needed.
As of this proposal, the only artifact type will be `image`.
It will let users specify the reference to the container image with the plugin that will be mounted and used.
The image can be specified using a tag or using a digest.
The advantage of the digest is that it exactly specifies the container image that will be used.
The advantage of the tag is that you can always use the latest version of the plugin without updating the custom resource.

> But it will not be deterministic which exact version is used.

Reviewer 4: I'm wondering whether using a tag would work in practice. Couldn't there be some strange behaviour if the underlying Jar file for a connector is swapped out half way through processing data?

Author: It works like the container image. It would not update on the fly, but when the Pod restarts. So it would be the same as when the connectors are inside the main container.

The following example shows the new YAML of the `KafkaConnect` resource:

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaConnect
metadata:
  # ...
spec:
  # ...
  plugins:

>     - name: echo-sink-connector

Reviewer 4: Once [KIP-891](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/KAFKA/KIP-891:+Running+multiple+versions+of+Connector+plugins) is accepted it will be possible to have multiple versions of a connector involved. I wonder if we should incorporate this into the proposal at all. Maybe it is enough that people can just use different names for the different versions if they want to have multiple versions of the same plugin, but thought it was worth considering.

Author: We are pretty indifferent to the version or to the actual content. So if we add a version field, all we would do with it is incorporate it into the path. But Connect will anyway use the version it reads from the plugin. So I think it would not be very useful and when using multiple versions of the same plugin, users can incorporate the version into the name I guess?

Reviewer 4: I think the user incorporating the version into the name is enough

      artifacts:
        - type: image
          reference: ghcr.io/scholzj/echo-sink@sha256:7078b3ccbc0d6e76fefb832dd6e4bb6b704f83611428c9d5b060ab0b6c3e8712
          pullPolicy: Always
```

Based on the `KafkaConnect` custom resource, the Strimzi Cluster operator will add the artifacts as image volumes to the Pod definitions.
The volumes will be named using the following schema: `plugin-<pluginName>-<imageReferenceHashstub>`.
This will ensure the volume names are unique.
For example:

```yaml
  # ...
  volumes:
    # ...
    - image:
        pullPolicy: Always
        reference: ghcr.io/scholzj/echo-sink@sha256:7078b3ccbc0d6e76fefb832dd6e4bb6b704f83611428c9d5b060ab0b6c3e8712
  # ...
```

This volume will then be mounted to the Kafka Connect container under a subdirectory structure of the `/opt/kafka/plugins/` path, which is the same location used when adding connectors to the custom container image.
Each volume is mounted at `/opt/kafka/plugins/<pluginName>/<imageReferenceHashStub>/`.
For example:

```yaml
    # ...
    volumeMounts:

>       - mountPath: /opt/kafka/plugins/echo-sink-connector/9e1cec06

Reviewer 4: This doesn't work with the way that Connect plugin path works. It has to be a flatter structure, so e.g. with files in `/opt/kafka/plugins/<pluginName>/<imageReferenceHashStub>/`, then `/opt/kafka/plugins/<pluginName>/` is a valid `plugin.path`, but `/opt/kafka/plugins/` is not.

Author: I'm pretty confident this works, because we use these structures already with Connect Build. The `plugin.path` is set to `/opt/kafka/plugins/` and it loads the plugins from the subdirectories directly under this path. But when loading the plugin from the subdirectory such as `/opt/kafka/plugins/echo-sink-connector/`, it also loads the nested subdirectories underneath it.

Why do you think it would not work?

Author: So this is an example structure that we have already today in `/opt/kafka/plugins` (sorry, no `tree` command in out containers):

```
$ ls -R /opt/kafka/plugins/ | grep ":$" | sed -e 's/:$//' -e 's/[^-][^\/]*\//--/g' -e 's/^/   /' -e 's/-/|/'
   |-----camel-timer-connector
   |-------59c24b83
   |-----debezium-mysql-connector
   |-------40970831
   |---------debezium-connector-mysql
   |-----echo-sink-connector
   |-------3f9bc275
   |-------d72b7000
```

The JARs are in the always in the deepest subdirectory. For example:

```
ls -l /opt/kafka/plugins/debezium-mysql-connector/40970831/debezium-connector-mysql/
total 16476
-rw-r--r-- 1 1000 1000  645321 Apr 23 10:21 CHANGELOG.md
-rw-r--r-- 1 1000 1000   19246 Apr 23 10:21 CONTRIBUTE.md
-rw-r--r-- 1 1000 1000    9764 Apr 23 10:21 COPYRIGHT.txt
-rw-r--r-- 1 1000 1000  168256 Apr 23 10:21 LICENSE-3rd-PARTIES.txt
-rw-r--r-- 1 1000 1000   11357 Apr 23 10:21 LICENSE.txt
-rw-r--r-- 1 1000 1000   16976 Apr 23 10:21 README.md
-rw-r--r-- 1 1000 1000   19608 Apr 23 10:21 README_JA.md
-rw-r--r-- 1 1000 1000   18365 Apr 23 10:21 README_KO.md
-rw-r--r-- 1 1000 1000   15739 Apr 23 10:21 README_ZH.md
-rw-r--r-- 1 1000 1000  322137 Apr 15  2022 antlr4-runtime-4.10.1.jar
-rw-r--r-- 1 1000 1000   31598 Apr 23 10:21 debezium-api-3.1.1.Final.jar
-rw-r--r-- 1 1000 1000  176528 Apr 23 10:22 debezium-connector-binlog-3.1.1.Final.jar
-rw-r--r-- 1 1000 1000  163514 Apr 23 10:23 debezium-connector-mysql-3.1.1.Final.jar
-rw-r--r-- 1 1000 1000 1304951 Apr 23 10:21 debezium-core-3.1.1.Final.jar
-rw-r--r-- 1 1000 1000 4379640 Apr 23 10:22 debezium-ddl-parser-3.1.1.Final.jar
-rw-r--r-- 1 1000 1000    6420 Apr 23 10:22 debezium-storage-file-3.1.1.Final.jar
-rw-r--r-- 1 1000 1000   16146 Apr 23 10:22 debezium-storage-kafka-3.1.1.Final.jar
-rw-r--r-- 1 1000 1000  222234 Nov 26 08:50 mysql-binlog-connector-java-0.40.2.jar
-rw-r--r-- 1 1000 1000 2597591 Oct 14  2024 mysql-connector-j-9.1.0.jar
-rw-r--r-- 1 1000 1000 6687870 Jul 20  2024 zstd-jni-1.5.6-4.jar
```

This is the same srtructure this proposal would utilize. And this is how the Connect finds it:

```
my-connect-connect-0 my-connect-connect 2025-05-12 15:01:09 INFO  [main] PluginScanner:75 - Loading plugin from: /opt/kafka/plugins/camel-timer-connector
my-connect-connect-0 my-connect-connect 2025-05-12 15:01:27 INFO  [main] PluginScanner:80 - Registered loader: PluginClassLoader{pluginLocation=file:/opt/kafka/plugins/camel-timer-connector/}
my-connect-connect-0 my-connect-connect 2025-05-12 15:01:27 INFO  [main] PluginScanner:75 - Loading plugin from: /opt/kafka/plugins/echo-sink-connector
my-connect-connect-0 my-connect-connect 2025-05-12 15:01:35 INFO  [main] PluginScanner:80 - Registered loader: PluginClassLoader{pluginLocation=file:/opt/kafka/plugins/echo-sink-connector/}
my-connect-connect-0 my-connect-connect 2025-05-12 15:01:35 INFO  [main] PluginScanner:75 - Loading plugin from: /opt/kafka/plugins/debezium-mysql-connector
my-connect-connect-0 my-connect-connect 2025-05-12 15:01:43 INFO  [main] PluginScanner:80 - Registered loader: PluginClassLoader{pluginLocation=file:/opt/kafka/plugins/debezium-mysql-connector/}
```

And finall here are the loaded plugins:

```
    connectorPlugins:
    - class: cz.scholz.kafka.connect.echosink.EchoSinkConnector
      type: sink
      version: 1.6.0
    - class: org.apache.camel.kafkaconnector.CamelSinkConnector
      type: sink
      version: 4.10.3
    - class: io.debezium.connector.mysql.MySqlConnector
      type: source
      version: 3.1.1.Final
    - class: org.apache.camel.kafkaconnector.CamelSourceConnector
      type: source
      version: 4.10.3
    - class: org.apache.camel.kafkaconnector.timersource.CamelTimersourceSourceConnector
      type: source
      version: 4.10.3
    - class: org.apache.kafka.connect.mirror.MirrorCheckpointConnector
      type: source
      version: 4.0.0
    - class: org.apache.kafka.connect.mirror.MirrorHeartbeatConnector
      type: source
      version: 4.0.0
    - class: org.apache.kafka.connect.mirror.MirrorSourceConnector
      type: source
      version: 4.0.0
```

Reviewer 4: @scholzj do you see any errors in the Connect logs with this setup? I am seeing some ServiceConfigurationError in the logs when loading the debezium-connector-mysql

Author: @katheris No. There is a warning about the Service Loader manifest for one of the Debezium transformations. But that is it in my logs. But I do not see anything like `ServiceConfigurationError`.

Reviewer 4: Thanks @scholzj, I'll raise a separate issue for us to understand why this works from a Connect PoV, but since it does I don't want to block this feature.

Author: Ok, thanks.

  status:
    state:
      waiting:
        message: 'Error response from daemon: invalid volume specification: '':/mnt/echo-sink-plugin/:ro'''
        reason: CreateContainerError
```

In such case, the user will need to edit the related Strimzi custom resource, remove the parts using the image volumes and apply the changes.
Afterwards, the Strimzi operator will recover and recreate the Pod with a valid configuration.

Use of a feature gate to prevent the use of image volumes on unsupported cluster was considered.
But since it is expected that we will be seeing Kubernetes clusters which do not support image volumes for a very long time, the feature gate which would be for a long time in alpha phase and would need to be always enabled does not seem to make sense.

### Testing strategy

The functionality from this proposal will be initially tested only using unit tests.
This should be sufficient in terms of test coverage given we only create the right Pod definition and the rest is up to Kubernetes.
Introducing a system test right now would mean that such a test would be executable only on very specific Kubernetes versions with specific configurations and would not add much value.

> System tests using image volumes might be added at a later stage once the image volume support reaches more Kubernetes clusters.

Reviewer 5: This has to be tracked with an issue imho. We should create one as part of this proposal being approved.

Author: I'm completely fine to open an issue for that when I open the PR for this proposal. However, as I said:
* I do not think we need STs for this as it is in general Kubernetes feature. We do not have STs for many other features that are Kubernertes responsibility.
* I think it would be pretty hard to track when the issue is _ready to be worked on_. It will be elft there for a long time and forgotten even after we add the tests.

So I do not think that is needed. But if you want it, no problem, I can open it.
